left Back to Episodes

Play

# New research: Get better ideas with AI (with Kian Gohar, Jeremy Utley, David McRaney, Henrik Werdelin)

February 20th, 2024 \| 01:08:54 \| E6

[Share](https://podcast.beyondtheprompt.ai/episodes/new-research-on-how-to-get-better-ideas-with-ai-with-kian-gohar-jeremy-utley-david-mcraney-henrik-werdelin/transcript#) [Embed](https://podcast.beyondtheprompt.ai/episodes/new-research-on-how-to-get-better-ideas-with-ai-with-kian-gohar-jeremy-utley-david-mcraney-henrik-werdelin/transcript#) [Subscribe](https://podcast.beyondtheprompt.ai/episodes/new-research-on-how-to-get-better-ideas-with-ai-with-kian-gohar-jeremy-utley-david-mcraney-henrik-werdelin/transcript#)

[Episode Details](https://podcast.beyondtheprompt.ai/episodes/new-research-on-how-to-get-better-ideas-with-ai-with-kian-gohar-jeremy-utley-david-mcraney-henrik-werdelin)/ [Transcript](https://podcast.beyondtheprompt.ai/episodes/new-research-on-how-to-get-better-ideas-with-ai-with-kian-gohar-jeremy-utley-david-mcraney-henrik-werdelin/transcript)

\[00:00:00\] Jeremy Utley: Hey there, welcome back to another episode of Beyond the Prompt, where we explore the most fascinating applications of generative AI in business today. I'm your host, Jeremy Utley, joined by my ever curious co host, Henrik Werdelin. Today's episode is special. I'm Henrik turns the tables on me and invites me to be a guest on my own show. And then he hands over my normal co hosting duties to none other than David McCraney, the brilliant mind behind the podcast, You Are Not So Smart. Joining us as a guest is my research partner, Kian Gohar. Over the past year, Kian and I have been knee deep in research, understanding the impact of generative AI on problem solving within organizations. What we've uncovered is both fascinating and a bit of a cautionary tale. A specific cognitive bias can seriously hamper AI assisted teams from reaching their full potential. Luckily, this bias is as preventable as it is predictable for folks who are aware of the phenomenon. David is here to help us unpack the cognitive bias conundrum, and Henrik will, of course, dive into its implications on the organizational front. It's a crossover episode you won't want to miss. Let's get started. When we first started seeing results flow in, my first thought was, oh no, oh no. You know, and actually it's a good sign as an academic researcher when you get the data back and you think, oh no, because then you wait a few beats. And I remember that first day, Kian and I are on the phone looking at stuff and I go, Oh, yeah.

\[00:01:40\] David McRaney: My name is David McCraney. This is the You Are Not So Smart podcast. And that was the voice of Jeremy Utley, a professor at Stanford University specializing in creativity and entrepreneurship. You may remember him from a previous episode of this podcast where we discussed his book Idea Flow. And since we recorded that episode, I have visited him at Stanford to see the inner workings of the d. school, where he teaches. Also known as the Hasso Platner Institute of Design, except no one calls it that. They call it the D School. And Jeremy Utley co founded a very popular program there called Stanford's Masters of Creativity. They literally take students from all walks of life, And put them through programs and activities designed to unlock their creative potentials. Pretty amazing! And I visit it as research for my next book, which is going to explore just what the word genius really means and why that's such a hard question to answer. Scientifically, linguistically, culturally, historically. All the big A L L Y words, it's going to be a weird book. I think you're going to love it, but yeah, the d. school, the d. school is one of a handful of places around the world devoted to systematically methodologically unlocking people's genius while also teaching them not only how to generate lots of ideas, but how to sort the good ones from the bad ones using the latest tools available. Which now includes AI, chat GPT, which is the subject of this episode. And the reason you just heard Jeremy say, Oh yeah, yeah. Surprising results. That's what he's referring to his research into how teams perform while using AI to assist them during brainstorming sessions. And that research delivered something amazing. Very unexpected in case you haven't heard AI tools, like chat, GPT are here and they are going to change just about every aspect of how we work. So if that's something you're thinking about, if that's something you're worried about, that's something you are interested in. And I think you should be perhaps all of those things. This is an episode about some of the earliest research into that topic that just published. Here's Jeremy and his research partner, Tien Gohar, talking about why they wanted to do the study. We're going to explore in this episode,

\[00:04:17\] Jeremy Utley: both Kian and I, when Chad GPT came out, we started playing and because of the roles we played advising organizations and building capacity around innovation, we start hearing kind of murmurs in our respective networks around what are the implications for innovation? What are the implications for creativity? Is ideation dead? You know, all these kinds of interesting questions. And the truth is we had hunches ourselves, but. We didn't really have anything more than a hunch. We had our own personal kind of call it anecdotal experience, but not much more. For me, the question was, what can we demonstrate apart from kind of anecdotal observation and what kinds of claims can we make about the impact of generative AI on the way teams work when they're trying to solve problems, but I got to actually, Kian because this whole project was his idea and I'm dying to know, actually, Kian, I'll just put you on the spot. What, what were you thinking when you concocted this crazy research project in your mind?

\[00:05:18\] Kian Gohar: Um, it was a crazy idea. It was the beginning of 2023, January. And, uh, so in my work, I help teams become high performing through solving problems more collaboratively through exercises and practices and behavioral changes that allow them over time to get better at what they do. And where chapter BT became publicly available. I was really interested in, in exploring, um, what happens to the world of problem solving and how do teams collaborate together one on one when all of a sudden you have this other tool that can help come up with ideas to problems that your team may have. And so I was really interested on, on exploring how the impact of generative AI on a team basis and how do teams use it, how will this improve their problem solving capability. How will it make them feel? How will it make them a higher performing team when they have access to these kinds of exponential digital tools that they've never had before?

\[00:06:20\] David McRaney: So they did the study. And based on the results, Jeremy and Kian have developed a whole paradigm for getting the most out of team based AI assisted ideation. It involves Taylor Swift, the Einstein effect, GPT prompts, cognitive biases. We'll get into all of that in just a moment. You'll hear all the details, which have a really interesting, you are not so smart angle that I'm eager to tell you about, and you'll get some incredible, useful science based actionable advice. But first, because this is relevant to what you're about to hear, you should know that Jeremy just launched a new podcast called Beyond the Prompt. The premise is that this is a show about how professionals around the world are using AI tools like ChatGBT at their companies right now, in their work. It's hosted by Jeremy and Henrik Werderlen, who is an entrepreneur known for starting BarkBox. A monthly dog toy and treat box subscription service. He also founded PreHype, a venture building R& D group in New York City. Their show features conversations with experts about how to leverage AI to accelerate, in a word, business. And since Jeremy and his research partner, Kian Gohar, just published a fresh scientific paper detailing their study into how to do just that. I sat down with all three of them, Jeremy, Henrik, and Kian, to record an episode about some surprising psychology they discovered. We will all have to take into account when using chat GPT and other AI tools. Here is everyone introducing themselves, starting with Jeremy Otley.

\[00:08:05\] Jeremy Utley: I've spent the last 15 years teaching at Stanford's D school, wrote what I thought would be the world's greatest book on brainstorming and idea generation. Uh, that was published one month before ChatGPT came out, which I consider to be the equivalent of writing the world's greatest book on retail prior to the invention of the internet. Uh, which is to say I have, uh, the, the, the, the sands upon which my expertise has built are shifting rapidly. So about a month after ChatGPT came out, I, I left my operational responsibilities at Stanford to go all in exploring, uh, the implications of AI on innovation and entrepreneurship and organizations.

\[00:08:47\] David McRaney: And here is Henrik Werdelin.

\[00:08:49\] Henrik Werdelin: Uh, I'm an entrepreneur. I've been building companies for most of my career and I'm very interested in, I guess, the odd and science of how you built from scratch and how you Make it a little bit less stressful to run. And for about AI, I have had access to OBI and a bunch of the other fundamental platforms for a few years. And. I'm very intrigued in both applied entrepreneurship, but also applied AI. So a little bit less of the bits and bobs and a little bit more on like, how do you actually get humans to use it?

\[00:09:22\] David McRaney: And finally, Kian Gohar.

\[00:09:24\] Kian Gohar: Yeah, sure. Hey gentlemen. Great to meet you all. Uh, Kian Gohar. I live in LA. I run a leadership development firm that helps. Organizations with high performing team behaviors. I wrote a book, uh, came out last year on the future of work based on best practices that, uh, the most high performing teams in the pandemic deployed and lessons learned from that. Formerly, I was an executive director at Singularity in Silicon Valley for many years, and also an executive director at the XPRIZE here in LA, designing moonshots to solve, uh, big challenges for humanity.

\[00:09:58\] David McRaney: Entrepreneurs, business, science. Academia. So while recording altogether somewhere along the way, we brainstormed a bit, which, you know, this makes this meta already. And we decided that I would make an episode about this study for You Are Not So Smart, and they would adapt that episode for their podcast, Beyond the Prompt. It's all very meta. So. Let's get into it. AI assisted ideation. The Taylor Swift method. The Einstellung effect. Before we get into just what all of that is, Let's And what Jeremy and Kian found in their research, let's take a moment to let them explain what exactly is ideation.

\[00:10:47\] Kian Gohar: Ideation, I think is, uh, developing effective possible solutions to a problem. And teams can define that however way they want, but coming together virtually or in person or in the metaverse to figure out what are the different possible ways a problem can be solved with. Different modalities.

\[00:11:09\] David McRaney: And in my mind, tell me if I'm wrong, like, it's coming up with good ideas.

\[00:11:13\] Jeremy Utley: You're wrong. You're wrong. Stop. Stop. No. No. Okay. Go. This drives me crazy. Thank you, David, for, for, for the opportunity to get on my high horse for a second. Good. There's, why good? Why introduce the concept of quality? And that's what everybody does, right? Everybody says ideation is coming up with good ideas, but the problem is good. And, and good. I don't think quality has any bearing on the conversation at the beginning and effective ideation insofar as ideation is effective problem solving. Effective ideation

[...truncated]